Switzerland , officially the Swiss Confederation , is a landlocked country at the confluence of Western , Central and Southern Europe .
Switzerland is bordered by Italy to the south , France to the west , Germany to the north and Austria and Liechtenstein to the east .
It is geographically divided among the Swiss Plateau , the Alps and the Jura , spanning a total area of 41,285 km2 ( 15,940 sq mi ) and land area of 39,997 km2 ( 15,443 sq mi ) .
Although the Alps occupy the greater part of the territory , the Swiss population of approximately 8.5 million is concentrated mostly on the plateau , where the largest cities and economic centres are , among them Zürich , Geneva , Basel and Lausanne .
These cities are home to several offices of international organisations such as the WTO , the WHO , the ILO , the seat of the International Olympic Committee , the headquarters of FIFA , the UN 's second-largest office , as well as the main building of the Bank for International Settlements .
The main international airports of Switzerland are also located in these cities .
The establishment of the Old Swiss Confederacy in the Late Middle Ages resulted from a series of military successes against Austria and Burgundy .
Swiss independence from the Holy Roman Empire was formally recognised in the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 .
The Federal Charter of 1291 is considered the founding document of Switzerland , which is celebrated on Swiss National Day .
Since the Reformation of the 16th century , Switzerland has maintained a firm policy of armed neutrality ; it has not fought an international war since 1815 and did not join the United Nations until 2002 .
Nevertheless , it pursues an active foreign policy .
It is frequently involved in peace-building processes worldwide .
Switzerland is the birthplace of the Red Cross , one of the world 's oldest and best known humanitarian organisations .
It is a founding member of the European Free Trade Association , but notably not part of the European Union , the European Economic Area or the Eurozone .
However , it participates in the Schengen Area and the European Single Market through bilateral treaties .
Switzerland occupies the crossroads of Germanic and Romance Europe , as reflected in its four main linguistic and cultural regions : German , French , Italian and Romansh .
Although the majority of the population are German-speaking , Swiss national identity is rooted in a common historical background , shared values such as federalism and direct democracy , Contents 1 Etymology 2 History 2.1 Early history 2.2 Old Swiss Confederacy 2.3 Napoleonic era 2.4 Federal state 2.5 Modern history 3 Geography 3.1 Climate 3.2 Environment 4 Politics 4.1 Direct democracy 4.2 Cantons 4.2.1 Municipalities 4.3 Foreign relations and international institutions 4.4 Military 4.5 The capital or Federal City issue 5 Economy and labour law 5.1 Taxation and government spending 5.2 Labour market 5.3 Education and science 5.4 Switzerland and the European Union 5.5 Energy , infrastructure and environment 6 Demographics 6.1 Languages 6.2 Health 6.3 Urbanisation 6.3.1 Largest cities 6.4 Religion 7 Culture 7.1 Literature 7.2 Media 7.3 Sports 7.4 Cuisine 8 See also 9 Notes and references 9.1 Notes 9.2 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Etymology Main article : Name of Switzerland The English name Switzerland is a compound containing Switzer , an obsolete term for a Swiss person which was in use during the 16th to 19th centuries .
The English adjective Swiss is a loan from French Suisse , also in use since the 16th century .
The name Switzer is from the Alemannic Schwiizer , in origin an inhabitant of Schwyz and its associated territory , one of the Waldstätte cantons which formed the nucleus of the Old Swiss Confederacy .
The Swiss began to adopt the name for themselves after the Swabian War of 1499 , used alongside the term for Confederates , Eidgenossen ( literally : comrades by oath ) , used since the 14th century .
The data code for Switzerland , CH , is derived from Latin Confoederatio Helvetica ( English : Helvetic Confederation ) .
The toponym Schwyz itself was first attested in 972 , as Old High German Suittes , ultimately perhaps related to swedan ‘ to burn ’ ( cf .
Old Norse svíða ‘ to singe , burn ’ ) , referring to the area of forest that was burned and cleared to build .
The Swiss German name of the country , Schwiiz , is homophonous to that of the canton and the settlement , but distinguished by the use of the definite article ( d'Schwiiz for the Confederation , of Swiss German is historically and still often today spelled ⟨y⟩ rather than ⟨ii⟩ , preserving the original identity of the two names even in writing .
The Latin name Confoederatio Helvetica was neologised and introduced gradually after the formation of the federal state in 1848 , harking back to the Napoleonic Helvetic Republic , appearing on coins from 1879 , inscribed on the Federal Palace in 1902 and after 1948 used in the official seal ( e.g. , the ISO banking code CHF for the Swiss franc , and the country top-level domain .ch , are both taken from the state 's Latin name ) .
Helvetica is derived from the Helvetii , a Gaulish tribe living on the Swiss plateau before the Roman era .
Helvetia appears as a national personification of the Swiss confederacy in the 17th century with a 1672 play by Johann Caspar Weissenbach .
History Main article : History of Switzerland Switzerland has existed as a state in its present form since the adoption of the Swiss Federal Constitution in 1848 .
The precursors of Switzerland established a defensive alliance at the end of the 13th century ( 1291 ) , forming a loose confederation of states which persisted for centuries .
Early history Main articles : Early history of Switzerland and Switzerland in the Roman era The oldest traces of hominid existence in Switzerland date back about 150,000 years .
Founded in 44 BC by Lucius Munatius Plancus , Augusta Raurica ( near Basel ) was the first Roman settlement on the Rhine and is now among the most important archaeological sites in Switzerland .
The earliest known cultural tribes of the area were members of the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures , named after the archaeological site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel .
La Tène culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age from around 450 BC , In 15 BC , Tiberius , who would one day become the second Roman emperor , and his brother Drusus , conquered the Alps , integrating them into the Roman Empire .
The area occupied by the Helvetii—the namesakes of the later Confoederatio Helvetica—first became part of Rome 's Gallia Belgica province and then of its Germania Superior province , while the eastern portion of modern Switzerland was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia .
Sometime around the start of the Common Era , the Romans maintained a large legionary camp called Vindonissa , now a ruin at the confluence of the Aare and Reuss rivers , near the town of Windisch , an outskirt of Brugg .
The first and second century AD was an age of prosperity for the population living on the Swiss plateau .
Several towns , like Aventicum , Iulia Equestris and Augusta Raurica , reached a remarkable size , while hundreds of agricultural estates ( Villae rusticae ) were founded in the countryside .
Around 260 AD , the fall of the Agri Decumates territory north of the Rhine transformed today 's Switzerland into a frontier land of the Empire .
Repeated raids by the Alamanni tribes provoked the ruin of the Roman towns and economy , forcing the population to find shelter near Roman fortresses , like the Castrum Rauracense near Augusta Raurica .
The Empire built another line of defence at the north border ( the so-called Donau-Iller-Rhine-Limes ) .
Still , at the end of the fourth century , the increased Germanic pressure forced the Romans to abandon the linear defence concept .
The Swiss plateau was finally open to the settlement of Germanic tribes .
In the Early Middle Ages , from the end of the 4th century , the western extent of modern-day Switzerland was part of the territory of the Kings of the Burgundians .
The Alemanni settled the Swiss plateau in the 5th century and the valleys of the Alps in the 8th century , forming Alemannia .
Modern-day Switzerland was therefore then divided between the kingdoms of Alemannia and Burgundy .
Throughout the rest of the 6th , 7th and 8th centuries , the Swiss regions continued under Frankish hegemony ( Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties ) .
But after its extension under Charlemagne , the Frankish Empire was divided by the Treaty of Verdun in 843 .
By 1200 , the Swiss plateau comprised the dominions of the houses of Savoy , Zähringer , Habsburg , and Kyburg .
Old Swiss Confederacy Main article : Old Swiss Confederacy Further information : Growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy , Reformation in Switzerland , and Early Modern Switzerland The Old Swiss Confederacy from 1291 ( dark green ) to the sixteenth century ( light green ) and its associates ( blue ) .
In the other colours shown are the subject territories .
The Old Swiss Confederacy was an alliance among the valley communities of the central Alps .
The Confederacy , governed by nobles and patricians of various cantons , facilitated management of common interests and ensured peace on the important mountain trade routes .
The Federal Charter of 1291 agreed between the rural communes of Uri , Schwyz , and Unterwalden is considered the confederacy 's founding document , even though similar alliances are likely to have existed decades earlier .
By 1353 , the three original cantons had joined with the cantons of Glarus and Zug and the Lucerne , Zürich and Bern city-states to form the Old Confederacy of eight states that existed until the end of the 15th century .
The expansion led to increased power and wealth for the confederation .
In 1501 , Basel and Schaffhausen joined the Old Swiss Confederacy .
The 1291 Bundesbrief ( federal charter ) The Old Swiss Confederacy had acquired a reputation of invincibility during these earlier wars , but expansion of the confederation suffered a setback in 1515 with the Swiss defeat in the Battle of Marignano .
This ended the so-called heroic epoch of Swiss history .
During the Early Modern period of Swiss history , the growing authoritarianism of the patriciate families combined with a financial crisis in the wake of the Thirty Years ' War led to the Swiss peasant war of 1653 .
In the background to this struggle , the conflict between Catholic and Protestant cantons persisted , erupting in further violence at the First War of Villmergen , in 1656 , and the Toggenburg War ( or Second War of Villmergen ) , in 1712 .
Napoleonic era Main articles : Switzerland in the Napoleonic era , Helvetic Republic , and Act of Mediation The Act of Mediation was Napoleon 's attempt at a compromise between the Ancien Régime and a Republic .
In 1798 , the revolutionary French government invaded Switzerland and imposed a new unified constitution .
When war broke out between France and its rivals , Russian and Austrian forces invaded Switzerland .
The Swiss refused to fight alongside the French in the name of the Helvetic Republic .
In 1803 Napoleon organised a meeting of the leading Swiss politicians from both sides in Paris .
The Act of Mediation was the result , which largely restored Swiss autonomy and introduced a Confederation of 19 cantons .
In 1815 the Congress of Vienna fully re-established Swiss independence , and the European powers agreed to recognise Swiss neutrality permanently .
Federal state Main articles : Restoration and Regeneration ( Switzerland ) and Switzerland as a federal state The first Federal Palace in Bern ( 1857 ) .
One of the three cantons presiding over the Tagsatzung ( former legislative and executive council ) , Bern was chosen as the permanent seat of federal legislative and executive institutions in 1848 , in part because of its closeness to the French-speaking area .
The restoration of power to the patriciate was only temporary .
After a period of unrest with repeated violent clashes , such as the Züriputsch of 1839 , civil war ( the Sonderbundskrieg ) broke out in 1847 when some Catholic cantons tried to set up a separate alliance ( the Sonderbund ) .
The war lasted for less than a month , causing fewer than 100 casualties , most of which were through friendly fire .
Yet however minor the Sonderbundskrieg appears compared with other European riots and wars in the 19th century , it nevertheless had a significant impact on both the psychology and the society of the Swiss and Switzerland .
The war convinced most Swiss of the need for unity and strength towards their European neighbours .
Swiss people from all strata of society , whether Catholic or Protestant , from the liberal or conservative current , realised that the cantons would profit more if their economic and religious interests were merged .
Thus , while the rest of Europe saw revolutionary uprisings , the Swiss drew up a constitution which provided for a federal layout , much of it inspired by the American example .
This constitution provided central authority while leaving the cantons the right to self-government on local issues .
Giving credit to those who favoured the power of the cantons ( the Sonderbund Kantone ) , the national assembly was divided between an upper house ( the Council of States , two representatives per canton ) and a lower house ( the National Council , with representatives elected from across the country ) .
Referendums were made mandatory for any amendment of this constitution .
Inauguration in 1882 of the Gotthard Rail Tunnel connecting the southern canton of Ticino , the longest in the world at the time A system of single weights and measures was introduced , and in 1850 the Swiss franc became the Swiss single currency , complemented by the WIR franc in 1934 .
Article 11 of the constitution forbade sending troops to serve abroad , marking the end of foreign service .
It came with the expectation of serving the Holy See , and the Swiss were still obliged to serve Francis II of the Two Sicilies with Swiss Guards present at the Siege of Gaeta in 1860 .
An important clause of the constitution was that it could be entirely rewritten if necessary , thus enabling it to evolve as a whole rather than being modified one amendment at a time .
This need soon proved itself when the rise in population and the Industrial Revolution that followed led to calls to modify the constitution accordingly .
The population rejected an early draft in 1872 , but modifications led to its acceptance in 1874 .
It introduced the facultative referendum for laws at the federal level .
It also established federal responsibility for defence , trade , and legal matters .
In 1891 , the constitution was revised with unusually strong elements of direct democracy , which remain unique today .
Modern history Main articles : Switzerland during the World Wars and Modern history of Switzerland General Ulrich Wille , appointed commander-in-chief of the Swiss Army for the duration of World War I Switzerland was not invaded during either of the world wars .
During World War I , Switzerland was home to the revolutionary and founder of the Soviet Union Vladimir Illych Ulyanov ( Vladimir Lenin ) .
He remained there until 1917 .
During World War II , detailed invasion plans were drawn up by the Germans , Switzerland 's trade was blockaded by both the Allies and by the Axis .
Economic cooperation and extension of credit to Nazi Germany varied according to the perceived likelihood of invasion and the availability of other trading partners .
Concessions reached a peak after a crucial rail link through Vichy France was severed in 1942 , leaving Switzerland ( together with Liechtenstein ) entirely isolated from the wider world by Axis-controlled territory .
Over the course of the war , Switzerland interned over 300,000 refugees During the war , the Swiss Air Force engaged aircraft of both sides , shooting down 11 intruding Luftwaffe planes in May and June 1940 , then forcing down other intruders after a change of policy following threats from Germany .
Over 100 Allied bombers and their crews were interned during the war , between 1940 and 1945 , Switzerland was bombed by the Allies causing fatalities and property damage .
Switzerland 's attitude towards refugees was complicated and controversial ; over the course of the war , it admitted as many as 300,000 refugees After the war , the Swiss government exported credits through the charitable fund known as the Schweizerspende and donated to the Marshall Plan to help Europe 's recovery , efforts that ultimately benefited the Swiss economy .
During the Cold War , Swiss authorities considered the construction of a Swiss nuclear bomb .
In 2003 , by granting the Swiss People 's Party a second seat in the governing cabinet , the Parliament altered the coalition that had dominated Swiss politics since 1959 .
Switzerland was the last Western republic ( the Principality of Liechtenstein followed in 1984 ) to grant women the right to vote .
Some Swiss cantons approved this in 1959 , while at the federal level , it was achieved in 1971 Switzerland joined the Council of Europe in 1963 .
In 2002 Switzerland became a full member of the United Nations , leaving the Vatican City as the last widely recognised state without full UN membership .
Switzerland is a founding member of the EFTA but is not a member of the European Economic Area .
An application for membership in the European Union was sent in May 1992 , but not advanced since the EEA was rejected in December 1992 Geography Main article : Geography of Switzerland Physical map of Switzerland ( in German ) Extending across the north and south side of the Alps in west-central Europe , Switzerland encompasses a great diversity of landscapes and climates on a limited area of 41,285 square kilometres ( 15,940 sq mi ) .
: 76 Switzerland lies between latitudes 45° and 48° N , and longitudes 5° and 11° E. It contains three basic topographical areas : the Swiss Alps to the south , the Swiss Plateau or Central Plateau , and the Jura mountains on the west .
The Alps are a high mountain range running across the central and south of the country , constituting about 60 % of the country 's total area .
The majority of the Swiss population live in the Swiss Plateau .
Among the high valleys of the Swiss Alps , many glaciers are found , totalling an area of 1,063 square kilometres ( 410 sq mi ) .
From these originate the headwaters of several major rivers , such as the Rhine , Inn , Ticino and Rhône , which flow in the four cardinal directions into the whole of Europe .
The hydrographic network includes several of the largest bodies of fresh water in Central and Western Europe , among which are included Lake Geneva ( also called le Lac Léman in French ) , Lake Constance ( known as Bodensee in German ) and Lake Maggiore .
Switzerland has more than 1500 lakes and contains 6 % of Europe 's freshwater stock .
Lakes and glaciers cover about 6 % of the national territory .
The largest lake is Lake Geneva , in western Switzerland shared with France .
The Rhône is both the main source and outflow of Lake Geneva .
Lake Constance is the second-largest Swiss lake and , like Lake Geneva , an intermediate step by the Rhine at the border to Austria and Germany .
While the Rhône flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the French Camargue region and the Rhine flows into the North Sea at Rotterdam in the Netherlands , about 1,000 kilometres ( 620 miles ) apart , both springs are only about 22 kilometres ( 14 miles ) apart from each other in the Swiss Alps .
Contrasted landscapes between the regions of the Matterhorn and Lake Lucerne Forty-eight of Switzerland 's mountains are 4,000 metres ( 13,000 ft ) above sea in altitude or higher .
The more populous northern part of the country , constituting about 30 % of the country 's total area , is called the Swiss Plateau .
It has greater open and hilly landscapes , partly forested , partly open pastures , usually with grazing herds or vegetables and fruit fields , but it is still hilly .
There are large lakes found here , and the biggest Swiss cities are in this area of the country .
Within Switzerland there are two small enclaves : Büsingen belongs to Germany , Campione d'Italia belongs to Italy .
Switzerland has no exclaves in other countries .
Climate Köppen–Geiger climate classification map for Switzerland The Swiss climate is generally temperate , but can vary greatly between the localities , from glacial conditions on the mountaintops to the often pleasant near Mediterranean climate at Switzerland 's southern tip .
There are some valley areas in the southern part of Switzerland where some cold-hardy palm trees are found .
Summers tend to be warm and humid at times with periodic rainfall , so they are ideal for pastures and grazing .
The less humid winters in the mountains may see long intervals of stable conditions for weeks .
At the same time , the lower lands tend to suffer from inversion , during these periods , thus seeing no sun for weeks .
A weather phenomenon known as the föhn ( with an identical effect to the chinook wind ) can occur at all times of the year and is characterised by an unexpectedly warm wind , bringing an air of very low relative humidity to the north of the Alps during rainfall periods on the southern face of the Alps .
This works both ways across the alps but is more efficient if blowing from the south due to the steeper step for oncoming wind .
Valleys running south to north trigger the best effect .
The driest conditions persist in all inner alpine valleys that receive less rain because arriving clouds lose a lot of their content while crossing the mountains before reaching these areas .
Large alpine areas such as Graubünden remain drier than pre-alpine areas , and as in the main valley of the Valais , wine grapes are grown there .
The wettest conditions persist in the high Alps and in the Ticino canton , which has much sun yet heavy bursts of rain from time to time .
Precipitation tends to be spread moderately throughout the year , with a peak in summer .
Autumn is the driest season , winter receives less precipitation than summer , yet the weather patterns in Switzerland are not in a stable climate system .
They can vary from year to year with no strict and predictable periods .
Environment Switzerland contains two terrestrial ecoregions : Western European broadleaf forests and Alps conifer and mixed forests .
Switzerland 's ecosystems can be particularly fragile , because the many delicate valleys separated by high mountains often form unique ecologies .
The mountainous regions themselves are also vulnerable , with a rich range of plants not found at other altitudes , and experience some pressure from visitors and grazing .
The climatic , geological and topographical conditions of the alpine region make for a very fragile ecosystem that is particularly sensitive to climate change .
However , access to biocapacity in Switzerland is far lower than world average .
In 2016 , Switzerland had 1.0 global hectares Switzerland had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.53/10 , ranking it 150th globally out of 172 countries .
Politics Main article : Politics of Switzerland The Swiss Federal Council in 2022 with President Ignazio Cassis ( bottom ) standing on a abstract , reduced railway lines map and positioned at their respective political origins .
The Federal Constitution adopted in 1848 is the legal foundation of the modern federal state .
the bicameral parliament ( legislative ) , the Federal Council ( executive ) and the Federal Court ( judicial ) .
The Federal Palace , seat of the Federal Assembly and the Federal Council The Swiss Parliament consists of two houses : the Council of States which has 46 representatives ( two from each canton and one from each half-canton ) who are elected under a system determined by each canton , and the National Council , which consists of 200 members who are elected under a system of proportional representation , depending on the population of each canton .
Members of both houses serve for 4 years and only serve as members of parliament part-time ( so-called Milizsystem or citizen legislature ) .
The Federal Council constitutes the federal government , directs the federal administration and serves as collective Head of State .
It is a collegial body of seven members , elected for a four-year mandate by the Federal Assembly which also exercises oversight over the council .
The President of the Confederation is elected by the Assembly from among the seven members , traditionally in rotation and for a one-year term ; the President chairs the government and assumes representative functions .
However , the president is a primus inter pares with no additional powers and remains the head of a department within the administration .
The Swiss government has been a coalition of the four major political parties since 1959 , each party having a number of seats that roughly reflects its share of electorate and representation in the federal parliament .
The classic distribution of 2 CVP/PDC , 2 SPS/PSS , 2 FDP/PRD and 1 SVP/UDC as it stood from 1959 to 2003 was known as the magic formula .
Following the 2015 Federal Council elections , the seven seats in the Federal Council were distributed as follows : 1 seat for the Christian Democratic People 's Party ( CVP/PDC ) , 2 seats for the Free Democratic Party ( FDP/PRD ) , 2 seats for the Social Democratic Party ( SPS/PSS ) , 2 seats for the Swiss People 's Party ( SVP/UDC ) .
The function of the Federal Supreme Court is to hear appeals against rulings of cantonal or federal courts .
The judges are elected by the Federal Assembly for six-year terms .
Direct democracy Main article : Voting in Switzerland The Landsgemeinde is an old form of direct democracy , still in practice in two cantons .
Direct democracy and federalism are hallmarks of the Swiss political system .
By calling a federal referendum , a group of citizens may challenge a law passed by parliament if they gather 50,000 signatures against the law within 100 days .
If so , a national vote is scheduled where voters decide by a simple majority whether to accept or reject the law .
Any eight cantons can also call a constitutional referendum on federal law .
Similarly , the federal constitutional initiative allows citizens to put a constitutional amendment to a national vote , if 100,000 voters sign the proposed amendment within 18 months .
Cantons Main article : Cantons of Switzerland The Swiss Confederation consists of 26 cantons : Canton ID Capital Canton ID Capital Aargau 19 Aarau * Nidwalden 7 Stans * Appenzell Ausserrhoden 15 Herisau * Obwalden 6 Sarnen * Appenzell Innerrhoden 16 Appenzell Schaffhausen 14 Schaffhausen * Basel-Landschaft 13 Liestal Schwyz 5 Schwyz * Basel-Stadt 12 Basel Solothurn 11 Solothurn Bern 2 Bern St. Gallen 17 St. Gallen Fribourg 10 Fribourg Thurgau 20 Frauenfeld Geneva 25 Geneva Ticino 21 Bellinzona Glarus 8 Glarus Uri 4 Altdorf Grisons 18 Chur Valais 23 Sion Jura 26 Delémont Vaud 22 Lausanne Lucerne 3 Lucerne Zug 9 Zug Neuchâtel 24 Neuchâtel Zürich 1 Zürich * These cantons are known as half-cantons .
The cantons are federated states , have a permanent constitutional status and , in comparison with the situation in other countries , a high degree of independence .
Under the Federal Constitution , all 26 cantons are equal in status , except that 6 ( referred to often as the half-cantons ) are represented by only one councillor ( instead of two ) in the Council of States and have only half a cantonal vote with respect to the required cantonal majority in referendums on constitutional amendments .
Each canton has its own constitution and its own parliament , government , police and courts .
However , there are considerable differences between the individual cantons , particularly in terms of population and geographical area .
Their populations vary between 16,003 ( Appenzell Innerrhoden ) and 1,487,969 ( Zürich ) , and their area between 37 km2 ( 14 sq mi ) ( Basel-Stadt ) and 7,105 km2 ( 2,743 sq mi ) ( Grisons ) .
Municipalities Main article : Municipalities of Switzerland The cantons comprise a total of 2,222 municipalities as of 2018 .
Foreign relations and international institutions Main article : Foreign relations of Switzerland Traditionally , Switzerland avoids alliances that might entail military , political , or direct economic action and has been neutral since the end of its expansion in 1515 .
Its policy of neutrality was internationally recognised at the Congress of Vienna in 1815 .
The colour-reversed Swiss flag became the symbol of the Red Cross Movement , Many international institutions have their seats in Switzerland , in part because of its policy of neutrality .
Geneva is the birthplace of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement , the Geneva Conventions and , since 2006 , hosts the United Nations Human Rights Council .
Even though Switzerland is one of the most recent countries to have joined the United Nations , the Palace of Nations in Geneva is the second biggest centre for the United Nations after New York .
Switzerland was a founding member and home to the League of Nations .
Apart from the United Nations headquarters , the Swiss Confederation is host to many UN agencies , like the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) , the International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) and about 200 other international organisations , including the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization .
The annual meetings of the World Economic Forum in Davos bring together top international business and political leaders from Switzerland and foreign countries to discuss important issues facing the world , including health and the environment .
Additionally , the headquarters of the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) are located in Basel since 1930 .
Furthermore , many sports federations and organisations are located in the country , such as the International Handball Federation in Basel , the International Basketball Federation in Geneva , the Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) in Nyon , the International Federation of Association Football ( FIFA ) and the International Ice Hockey Federation both in Zürich , the International Cycling Union in Aigle , and the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne .
Military Main articles : Swiss Armed Forces and Pontifical Swiss Guard A Swiss Air Force F/A-18 Hornet at Axalp Air Show The Swiss Armed Forces , including the Land Forces and the Air Force , are composed mostly of conscripts , male citizens aged from 20 to 34 ( in exceptional cases up to 50 ) years .
Being a landlocked country , Switzerland has no navy ; however , on lakes bordering neighbouring countries , armed military patrol boats are used .
Swiss citizens are prohibited from serving in foreign armies , except for the Swiss Guards of the Vatican , or if they are dual citizens of a foreign country and reside there .
The structure of the Swiss militia system stipulates that the soldiers keep their Army issued equipment , including all personal weapons , at home .
Some organisations and political parties find this practice controversial .
The newest reform of the military , WEA/DEVA/USEs , started in 2019 and will reduce the number of army personnel progressively to 100,000 by the end of 2022 .
Swiss-built Mowag Eagles of the Land Forces Overall , three general mobilisations have been declared to ensure the integrity and neutrality of Switzerland .
The first one was held on the occasion of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71 .
The second was in response to the First World War outbreak in August 1914 .
The third mobilisation of the army took place in September 1939 in response to the German attack on Poland ; Henri Guisan was elected as the General-in-Chief .
Because of its neutrality policy , the Swiss army does not currently take part in armed conflicts in other countries but is part of some peacekeeping missions worldwide .
Since 2000 the armed force department has also maintained the Onyx intelligence gathering system to monitor satellite communications .
Gun politics in Switzerland are unique in Europe in that 2–3.5 million guns are in the hands of civilians , giving the nation an estimate of 27.6–41.2 guns per 100 people .
The capital or Federal City issue Until 1848 the loosely coupled Confederation did not know a central political organisation .
Still , representatives , mayors , and Landammänner met several times a year at the capital of the Lieu presiding the Confederal Diet for one year .
The Old City of Bern Until 1500 the legates met most of the time in Lucerne , but also in Zürich , Baden , Bern , Schwyz etc. , but sometimes also at places outside of the confederation , such as Constance .
From the Swabian War in 1499 onwards until Reformation , most conferences met in Zürich .
Afterwards , the town hall at Baden , where the annual accounts of the common people had been held regularly since 1426 , became the most frequent but not the sole place of assembly .
After 1712 Frauenfeld gradually dissolved Baden .
From 1526 , the Catholic conferences were held mostly in Lucerne , the Protestant conferences from 1528 mostly in Aarau , the one for the legitimation of the French Ambassador in Solothurn .
At the same time the syndicate for the Ennetbirgischen Vogteien located in the present Ticino met from 1513 in Lugano and Locarno .
After the Helvetic Republic and during the Mediation from 1803 until 1815 the Confederal Diet of the 19 Lieus met at the capitals of the directoral cantons Fribourg , Berne , Basel , Zürich , Lucerne and Solothurn .
After the Long Diet from 6 April 1814 to 31 August 1815 took place in Zürich to replace the constitution , and the enhancement of the Confederation to 22 cantons by the admission of the cantons of Valais , Neuchâtel and Geneva to full members , the directorial cantons of Lucerne , Zürich and Bern took over the diet in two-year turns .
In 1848 , the federal constitution provided that details concerning the federal institutions , such as their locations , should be taken care of by the Federal Assembly ( BV 1848 Art .
108 ) .
Thus on 28 November 1848 , the Federal Assembly voted in the majority to locate the seat of government in Bern .
And , as a prototypical federal compromise , to assign other federal institutions , such as the Federal Polytechnical School ( 1854 , the later ETH ) to Zürich , and other institutions to Lucerne , such as the later SUVA ( 1912 ) and the Federal Insurance Court ( 1917 ) .
In 1875 , a law ( RS 112 ) fixed the compensations owed by the city of Bern for the federal seat .
According to these living fundamental federalists feelings , other federal institutions were subsequently attributed to Lausanne ( Federal Supreme Court in 1872 , and EPFL in 1969 ) , Bellinzona ( Federal Criminal Court , 2004 ) , and St. Gallen ( Federal Administrative Court and Federal Patent Court , 2012 ) .
The 1999 new constitution , however , does not contain anything concerning any Federal City .
In 2002 , the Swiss Federal Council asked a tripartite committee to prepare the creation of a federal law on the status of Bern as a Federal City and to evaluate the positive and negative aspects of the city and the canton of Bern if this status were awarded .
After a first report , the work of this committee was suspended in 2004 by the Swiss Federal Council , and work on this subject has not resumed since .
Thus as of today , no city in Switzerland has the official status either of capital or of Federal City .
Nevertheless , Bern is commonly referred to as Federal City ( German : Bundesstadt , French : ville fédérale , Italian : città federale ) .
Economy and labour law Main article : Economy of Switzerland See also : Banking in Switzerland , Taxation in Switzerland , and Federal budget of Switzerland A proportional representation of Switzerland exports , 2019 The city of Basel ( Roche Tower ) is the capital of the country 's pharmaceutical industry , which accounts for around 38 % of Swiss exports worldwide .
The Greater Zürich area , home to 1.5 million inhabitants and 150,000 companies , is one of the most important economic centres in the world .
The Omega Speedmaster worn on the moon during the Apollo missions .
In terms of value , Switzerland is responsible for half of the world production of watches .
Origin of the capital at the 30 biggest Swiss corporations , 2018 Switzerland ( 39 % ) North America ( 33 % ) Europe ( 24 % ) Rest of the world ( 4 % ) Switzerland has a stable , prosperous and high-tech economy and enjoys great wealth , being ranked as the wealthiest country in the world per capita in multiple rankings .
The country has been ranked as one of the least corrupt countries in the world , Switzerland has the highest European rating in the Index of Economic Freedom 2010 , while also providing large coverage through public services .
The World Economic Forum 's Global Competitiveness Report currently ranks Switzerland 's economy as the most competitive in the world , For much of the 20th century , Switzerland was the wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin ( by GDP – per capita ) .
Switzerland is home to several large multinational corporations .
The largest Swiss companies by revenue are Glencore , Gunvor , Nestlé , Mediterranean Shipping Company , Novartis , Hoffmann-La Roche , ABB , Mercuria Energy Group and Adecco .
Switzerland 's most important economic sector is manufacturing .
Manufacturing consists largely of the production of specialist chemicals , health and pharmaceutical goods , scientific and precision measuring instruments and musical instruments .
The largest exported goods are chemicals ( 34 % of exported goods ) , machines/electronics ( 20.9 % ) , and precision instruments/watches ( 16.9 % ) .
The service sector – especially banking and insurance , tourism , and international organisations – is another important industry for Switzerland .
The high valley of Engadine .
Tourism constitutes an important revenue for the less industrialised alpine regions.Agricultural protectionism—a rare exception to Switzerland 's free trade policies—has contributed to high food prices .
Product market liberalisation is lagging behind many EU countries according to the OECD .
Apart from agriculture , economic and trade barriers between the European Union and Switzerland are minimal , and Switzerland has free trade agreements worldwide .
Switzerland is a member of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) .
Taxation and government spending See also : Taxation in Switzerland Switzerland has an overwhelmingly private sector economy and low tax rates ; overall taxation is one of the smallest of developed countries .
The Swiss Federal budget had a size of 62.8 billion Swiss francs in 2010 , which is an equivalent 11.35 % of the country 's GDP in that year ; however , the regional ( canton ) budgets and the budgets of the municipalities are not counted as part of the federal budget and the total rate of government spending is closer to 33.8 % of GDP .
The main sources of income for the federal government are the value-added tax ( accounting for 33 % of tax revenue ) and the direct federal tax ( 29 % ) , with the main areas of expenditure in social welfare and finance/taxes .
The expenditures of the Swiss Confederation have been growing from 7 % of GDP in 1960 to 9.7 % in 1990 and 10.7 % in 2010 .
While the sectors social welfare and finance & tax had been growing from 35 % in 1990 to 48.2 % in 2010 , a significant reduction of expenditures has been occurring in agriculture and national defence ; from 26.5 % to 12.4 % ( estimation for the year 2015 ) .
Labour market Slightly more than 5 million people work in Switzerland ; In 2016 , the median monthly gross salary in Switzerland was 6,502 francs per month ( equivalent to US $ 6,597 per month ) , is just enough to cover the high cost of living .
About 8.2 % of the population live below the national poverty line , defined in Switzerland as earning less than CHF3,990 per month for a household of two adults and two children , and a further 15 % are at risk of poverty .
Single-parent families , those with no post-compulsory education and those out of work are among the most likely to live below the poverty line .
Although getting a job is considered a way out of poverty , some 4.3 % are considered working poor among the gainfully employed .
One in ten jobs in Switzerland is considered low-paid , and roughly 12 % of Swiss workers hold such jobs , many of them women and foreigners .
Education and science The University of Basel is Switzerland 's oldest university ( 1460 ) .
Main articles : Education in Switzerland and Science and technology in Switzerland Some Swiss scientists who played a key role in their discipline ( clockwise ) : Leonhard Euler ( mathematics ) Louis Agassiz ( glaciology ) Auguste Piccard ( aeronautics ) Albert Einstein ( physics ) Education in Switzerland is very diverse because the constitution of Switzerland delegates the authority for the school system to the cantons .
while students who assimilate a little more slowly receive an education more adapted to their needs .
There are 12 universities in Switzerland , ten of which are maintained at cantonal level and usually offer a range of non-technical subjects .
The first university in Switzerland was founded in 1460 in Basel ( with a faculty of medicine ) and has a tradition of chemical and medical research in Switzerland .
It is listed 87th on the 2019 Academic Ranking of World Universities .
The two institutes sponsored by the federal government are the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich ( ETHZ ) in Zürich , founded 1855 and the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne ( EPFL ) in Lausanne , founded 1969 as such , which was formerly an institute associated with the University of Lausanne .
Eight of ten best hotel schools in the world are located in Switzerland .
The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies , located in Geneva , is not only continental Europe 's oldest graduate school of international and development studies , but also widely believed to be one of its most prestigious .
Many Nobel Prize laureates have been Swiss scientists .
They include the world-famous physicist Albert Einstein The LHC tunnel .
CERN is the world 's largest laboratory and also the birthplace of the World Wide Web .
Geneva and the nearby French department of Ain co-host the world 's largest laboratory , CERN , dedicated to particle physics research .
Another important research centre is the Paul Scherrer Institute .
Notable inventions include lysergic acid diethylamide ( LSD ) , diazepam ( Valium ) , the scanning tunnelling microscope ( Nobel prize ) and Velcro .
Some technologies enabled the exploration of new worlds such as the pressurised balloon of Auguste Piccard and the Bathyscaphe which permitted Jacques Piccard to reach the deepest point of the world 's oceans .
Switzerland Space Agency , the Swiss Space Office , has been involved in various space technologies and programmes .
In addition it was one of the 10 founders of the European Space Agency in 1975 and is the seventh largest contributor to the ESA budget .
In the private sector , several companies are implicated in the space industry such as Oerlikon Space who provide spacecraft structures .
Switzerland and the European Union Main article : Switzerland–European Union relations Switzerland voted against membership in the European Economic Area in a referendum in December 1992 and has since maintained and developed its relationships with the European Union ( EU ) and European countries through bilateral agreements .
In March 2001 , the Swiss people refused in a popular vote to start accession negotiations with the EU .
Members of the European Free Trade Association ( green ) participate in the European Single Market and are part of the Schengen Area .
The government has established an Integration Office under the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Economic Affairs .
Bern and Brussels signed seven bilateral agreements to liberalise trade ties further to minimise the negative consequences of Switzerland 's isolation from the rest of Europe .
These agreements were signed in 1999 and took effect in 2001 .
This first series of bilateral agreements included the free movement of persons .
A second series covering nine areas was signed in 2004 and has since been ratified , which includes the Schengen Treaty and the Dublin Convention besides others .
In 2006 , Switzerland approved 1 billion francs of supportive investment in the poorer Southern and Central European countries in support of cooperation and positive ties to the EU as a whole .
A further referendum will be needed to approve 300 million francs to support Romania and Bulgaria and their recent admission .
The Swiss have also been under EU and sometimes international pressure to reduce banking secrecy and raise tax rates to parity with the EU .
Preparatory discussions are being opened in four new areas : opening up the electricity market , participation in the European GNSS project Galileo , cooperating with the European Centre for disease prevention and recognising certificates of origin for food products .
On 27 November 2008 , the interior and justice ministers of the European Union in Brussels announced Switzerland 's accession to the Schengen passport-free zone from 12 December 2008 .
The land border checkpoints will remain in place only for goods movements but should not control people .
However , people entering the country had their passports checked until 29 March 2009 if they originated from a Schengen nation .
On 9 February 2014 , Swiss voters narrowly approved by 50.3 % a ballot initiative launched by the national conservative Swiss People 's Party ( SVP/UDC ) to restrict immigration , and thus reintroducing a quota system on the influx of foreigners .
This initiative was mostly backed by rural ( 57.6 % approvals ) and suburban agglomerations ( 51.2 % approvals ) , and isolated towns ( 51.3 % approvals ) as well as by a strong majority ( 69.2 % approval ) in the canton of Ticino , while metropolitan centres ( 58.5 % rejection ) and the French-speaking part ( 58.5 % rejection ) rather rejected it .
In December 2016 , a political compromise with the European Union was attained effectively cancelling quotas on EU citizens but still allowing for favourable treatment of Swiss-based job applicants .
On 27 September 2020 , Swiss voters clearly rejected the anti-free movement popular initiative by the conservative Swiss People 's Party ( SVP ) with nearly 62 % no votes , reflecting democratic support for bilateral agreements with the European Union .
Energy , infrastructure and environment See also : Energy in Switzerland , Transport in Switzerland , Waste management in Switzerland , and Environment of Switzerland Switzerland has the tallest dams in Europe , among which the Mauvoisin Dam , in the Alps .
Hydroelectricity is the most important domestic source of energy in the country .
Electricity generated in Switzerland is 56 % from hydroelectricity and 39 % from nuclear power , resulting in a nearly CO2-free electricity-generating network .
On 18 May 2003 , two anti-nuclear initiatives were turned down : Moratorium Plus , aimed at forbidding the building of new nuclear power plants ( 41.6 % supported and 58.4 % opposed ) , Entrance of the new Lötschberg Base Tunnel , the third-longest railway tunnel in the world , under the old Lötschberg railway line .
It was the first completed tunnel of the greater project NRLA .
The most dense rail network in Europe and the Matterhorn Gotthard Bahn ( MGB ) , which co-operates together with RhB the Glacier Express between Zermatt and St. Moritz/Davos .
On 31 May 2016 the world 's longest and deepest railway tunnel and the first flat , low-level route through the Alps , the 57.1-kilometre long ( 35.5 mi ) Gotthard Base Tunnel , opened as the largest part of the New Railway Link through the Alps ( NRLA ) project after 17 years of realization .
It started its daily business for passenger transport on 11 December 2016 replacing the old , mountainous , scenic route over and through the St Gotthard Massif .
Switzerland has a publicly managed road network without road tolls that is financed by highway permits as well as vehicle and gasoline taxes .
The Swiss autobahn/autoroute system requires the purchase of a vignette ( toll sticker ) —which costs 40 Swiss francs—for one calendar year in order to use its roadways , for both passenger cars and trucks .
The Swiss autobahn/autoroute network has a total length of 1,638 km ( 1,018 mi ) ( as of 2000 ) and has , by an area of 41,290 km2 ( 15,940 sq mi ) , also one of the highest motorway densities in the world .
EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg which is located in France , Bern Airport , Lugano Airport , St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport and Sion Airport .
Swiss International Air Lines is the flag carrier of Switzerland .
Its main hub is Zürich , but it is legally domiciled in Basel .
Switzerland has one of the best environmental records among nations in the developed world ; Switzerland developed an efficient system to recycle most recyclable materials .
Switzerland also has an economic system for garbage disposal , which is based mostly on recycling and energy-producing incinerators due to a strong political will to protect the environment .
Demographics Main articles : Demographics of Switzerland and Swiss people Further information : List of Swiss people Population density in Switzerland ( 2019 ) Percentage of foreigners in Switzerland ( 2019 ) In 2018 , Switzerland 's population slightly exceeded 8.5 million .
In common with other developed countries , the Swiss population increased rapidly during the industrial era , quadrupling between 1800 and 1990 and has continued to grow .
Like most of Europe , Switzerland faces an ageing population , albeit with consistent annual growth projected into 2035 , due mostly to immigration and a fertility rate close to replacement level .
As of 2019 Additionally , the figures from 2012 show that 34.7 % of the permanent resident population aged 15 or over in Switzerland ( around 2.33 million ) , had an immigrant background .
A third of this population ( 853,000 ) held Swiss citizenship .
Four-fifths of persons with an immigration background were themselves immigrants ( first generation foreigners and native-born and naturalised Swiss citizens ) , whereas one fifth were born in Switzerland ( second generation foreigners and native-born and naturalised Swiss citizens ) .
In the 2000s , domestic and international institutions expressed concern about what was perceived as an increase in xenophobia , particularly in some political campaigns .
In reply to one critical report , the Federal Council noted that racism unfortunately is present in Switzerland , but stated that the high proportion of foreign citizens in the country , as well as the generally unproblematic integration of foreigners , underlined Switzerland 's openness .
Fourteen percent of men and 6.5 % of women between 20 and 24 saying they had consumed cannabis in the past 30 days , Languages Main article : Languages of Switzerland National languages in Switzerland ( 2016 ) : German ( 62.8 % ) French ( 22.9 % ) Italian ( 8.2 % ) Romansh ( 0.5 % ) Switzerland has four national languages : mainly German ( spoken by 62.8 % of the population in 2016 ) ; French ( 22.9 % ) in the west ; and Italian ( 8.2 % ) in the south .
The fourth national language , Romansh ( 0.5 % ) , is a Romance language spoken locally in the southeastern trilingual canton of Grisons , and is designated by Article 4 of the Federal Constitution as a national language along with German , French , and Italian , and in Article 70 as an official language if the authorities communicate with persons who speak Romansh .
However , federal laws and other official acts do not need to be decreed in Romansh .
In 2016 , the languages most spoken at home among permanent residents aged 15 and older were Swiss German ( 59.4 % ) , French ( 23.5 % ) , Standard German ( 10.6 % ) , and Italian ( 8.5 % ) .
Other languages spoken at home included English ( 5.0 % ) , Portuguese ( 3.8 % ) , Albanian ( 3.0 % ) , Spanish ( 2.6 % ) and Serbian and Croatian ( 2.5 % ) .
6.9 % reported speaking another language at home .
The federal government is obliged to communicate in the official languages , and in the federal parliament simultaneous translation is provided from and into German , French and Italian .
Aside from the official forms of their respective languages , the four linguistic regions of Switzerland also have their local dialectal forms .
The role played by dialects in each linguistic region varies dramatically : in the German-speaking regions , Swiss German dialects have become ever more prevalent since the second half of the 20th century , especially in the media , such as radio and television , and are used as an everyday language for many , while the Swiss variety of Standard German is almost always used instead of dialect for written communication ( c.f .
diglossic usage of a language ) .
The principal official languages ( German , French , and Italian ) have terms , not used outside of Switzerland , known as Helvetisms .
German Helvetisms are , roughly speaking , a large group of words typical of Swiss Standard German , which do not appear either in Standard German , nor in other German dialects .
These include terms from Switzerland 's surrounding language cultures ( German Billett Learning one of the other national languages at school is compulsory for all Swiss pupils , so many Swiss are supposed to be at least bilingual , especially those belonging to linguistic minority groups .
Health Main articles : Health in Switzerland and Healthcare in Switzerland Swiss residents are universally required to buy health insurance from private insurance companies , which in turn are required to accept every applicant .
While the cost of the system is among the highest , it compares well with other European countries in terms of health outcomes ; patients have been reported as being , in general , highly satisfied with it .
It is estimated that one out of six persons in Switzerland suffers from mental illness .
Urbanisation Main article : Towns of Switzerland Urbanisation in the Rhone Valley ( outskirts of Sion ) Between two-thirds and three-quarters of the population live in urban areas .
Switzerland has a dense network of towns , where large , medium and small towns are complementary .
Largest cities vte Largest towns in SwitzerlandSwiss Federal Statistical Office ( FSO ) , Neuchâtel , 2020 Rank Name Canton Pop .
Rank Name Canton Pop .
ZürichGeneva 1 Zürich Zürich 421,878 11 Thun Bern 43,476 BaselLausanne 2 Geneva Geneva 203,856 12 Bellinzona Ticino 43,360 3 Basel Basel-Stadt 178,120 13 Köniz Bern 42,388 4 Lausanne Vaud 140,202 14 La Chaux-de-Fonds Neuchâtel 36,915 5 Bern Bern 134,794 15 Fribourg Fribourg 38,039 6 Winterthur Zürich 114,220 16 Schaffhausen Schaffhausen 36,952 7 Lucerne Luzern 82,620 17 Vernier Geneva 34,898 8 St. Gallen St. Gallen 76,213 18 Chur Graubünden 36,336 9 Lugano Ticino 62,315 19 Sion Valais 34,978 10 Biel/Bienne Bern 55,206 20 Uster Zürich 35,337 Religion Main article : Religion in Switzerland Religion ( age 15+ ) in Switzerland , 2016–2018 Affiliation Percent of Swiss population Christian faiths 66.5 66.5 Roman Catholic 35.8 35.8 Swiss Reformed 23.8 23.8 Eastern Orthodox 2.5 2.5 Evangelical Protestant 1.2 1.2 Lutheran 1.0 1 other Christian 2.2 2.2 Non-Christian faiths 6.6 6.6 Muslim 5.3 5.3 Buddhist 0.5 0.5 Hindu 0.6 0.6 Jewish 0.2 0.2 other religious communities 0.3 0.3 no religious affiliation 26.3 26.3 unknown 1.4 1.4 Switzerland has no official state religion , though most of the cantons ( except Geneva and Neuchâtel ) recognise official churches , which are either the Catholic Church or the Swiss Reformed Church .
These churches , and in some cantons also the Old Catholic Church and Jewish congregations , are financed by official taxation of adherents .
Christianity is the predominant religion of Switzerland ( about 67 % of resident population in 2016–2018 26.3 % of Swiss permanent residents are not affiliated with any religious community ( Atheism , Agnosticism , and others ) .
As of the 2000 census other Christian minority communities included Neo-Pietism ( 0.44 % ) , Pentecostalism ( 0.28 % , mostly incorporated in the Schweizer Pfingstmission ) , Methodism ( 0.13 % ) , the New Apostolic Church ( 0.45 % ) , Jehovah 's Witnesses ( 0.28 % ) , other Protestant denominations ( 0.20 % ) , the Old Catholic Church ( 0.18 % ) , other Christian denominations ( 0.20 % ) .
Non-Christian religions are Hinduism ( 0.38 % ) , Buddhism ( 0.29 % ) , Judaism ( 0.25 % ) and others ( 0.11 % ) ; 4.3 % did not make a statement .
Historically , the country was about evenly balanced between Catholic and Protestant , with a complex patchwork of majorities over most of the country .
Switzerland played an exceptional role during the Reformation as it became home to many reformers .
Geneva converted to Protestantism in 1536 , just before John Calvin arrived there .
In 1541 , he founded the Republic of Geneva on his own ideals .
It became known internationally as the Protestant Rome and housed such reformers as Theodore Beza , William Farel or Pierre Viret .
Zürich became another stronghold around the same time , with Huldrych Zwingli and Heinrich Bullinger taking the lead there .
Anabaptists Felix Manz and Conrad Grebel also operated there .
They were later joined by the fleeing Peter Martyr Vermigli and Hans Denck .
Other centres included Basel ( Andreas Karlstadt and Johannes Oecolampadius ) , Berne ( Berchtold Haller and Niklaus Manuel ) , and St. Gallen ( Joachim Vadian ) .
One canton , Appenzell , was officially divided into Catholic and Protestant sections in 1597 .
The larger cities and their cantons ( Bern , Geneva , Lausanne , Zürich and Basel ) used to be predominantly Protestant .
Central Switzerland , the Valais , the Ticino , Appenzell Innerrhodes , the Jura , and Fribourg are traditionally Catholic .
The Swiss Constitution of 1848 , under the recent impression of the clashes of Catholic vs Protestant cantons that culminated in the Sonderbundskrieg , consciously defines a consociational state , allowing the peaceful co-existence of Catholics and Protestants .
A 1980 initiative calling for the complete separation of church and state was rejected by 78.9 % of the voters .
Culture Main article : Culture of Switzerland See also : Music of Switzerland , Swiss folklore , and Alpine culture Alphorn concert in Vals Three of Europe 's major languages are official in Switzerland .
Swiss culture is characterised by diversity , which is reflected in a wide range of traditional customs .
The linguistically isolated Romansh culture in Graubünden in eastern Switzerland constitutes an exception .
It survives only in the upper valleys of the Rhine and the Inn and strives to maintain its rare linguistic tradition .
Switzerland is home to many notable contributors to literature , art , architecture , music and sciences .
In addition , the country attracted a number of creative persons during times of unrest or war in Europe .
Some 1000 museums are distributed through the country ; the number has more than tripled since 1950 .
Alpine symbolism has played an essential role in shaping the history of the country and the Swiss national identity .
Literature Main article : Literature of Switzerland Jean-Jacques Rousseau was not only a writer but also an influential philosopher of the eighteenth century .
From its foundation in 1291 , the Confederation was almost exclusively composed of German-speaking regions , the earliest forms of literature were in German .
In the 18th century , French became the fashionable language in Bern and elsewhere , while the influence of the French-speaking allies and subject lands was more marked than before .
Among the classic authors of Swiss German literature are Jeremias Gotthelf ( 1797–1854 ) and Gottfried Keller ( 1819–1890 ) .
The undisputed giants of 20th-century Swiss literature are Max Frisch ( 1911–91 ) and Friedrich Dürrenmatt ( 1921–90 ) , whose repertoire includes Die Physiker ( The Physicists ) and Das Versprechen ( The Pledge ) , released in 2001 as a Hollywood film .
Famous French-speaking writers were Jean-Jacques Rousseau ( 1712–1778 ) and Germaine de Staël ( 1766–1817 ) .
More recent authors include Charles Ferdinand Ramuz ( 1878–1947 ) , whose novels describe the lives of peasants and mountain dwellers , set in a harsh environment and Blaise Cendrars ( born Frédéric Sauser , 1887–1961 ) .
Italian and Romansh-speaking authors also contributed to the Swiss literary landscape , but generally in more modest ways given their small number .
Probably the most famous Swiss literary creation , Heidi , the story of an orphan girl who lives with her grandfather in the Alps , is one of the most popular children 's books ever and has come to be a symbol of Switzerland .
Her creator , Johanna Spyri ( 1827–1901 ) , wrote a number of other books on similar themes .
Media Main article : Media of Switzerland The freedom of the press and the right to free expression is guaranteed in the federal constitution of Switzerland .
Switzerland has historically boasted the greatest number of newspaper titles published in proportion to its population and size .
The government exerts greater control over broadcast media than print media , especially due to financing and licensing .
Sports Main article : Sport in Switzerland Ski area over the glaciers of Saas-Fee Skiing , snowboarding and mountaineering are among the most popular sports in Switzerland , the nature of the country being particularly suited for such activities .
The first world ski championships were held in Mürren ( 1931 ) and St. Moritz ( 1934 ) .
The latter town hosted the second Winter Olympic Games in 1928 and the fifth edition in 1948 .
Among the most successful skiers and world champions are Pirmin Zurbriggen and Didier Cuche .
The most prominently watched sports in Switzerland are football , ice hockey , Alpine skiing , Schwingen , and tennis .
The headquarters of the international football 's and ice hockey 's governing bodies , the International Federation of Association Football ( FIFA ) and International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) are located in Zürich .
Many other headquarters of international sports federations are located in Switzerland .
For example , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) , IOC 's Olympic Museum and the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) are located in Lausanne .
Switzerland hosted the 1954 FIFA World Cup and was the joint host , with Austria , of the UEFA Euro 2008 tournament .
The Swiss Super League is the nation 's professional football club league .
Europe 's highest football pitch , at 2,000 metres ( 6,600 ft ) above sea level , is located in Switzerland and is named the Ottmar Hitzfeld Stadium .
Roger Federer has won a record 20 Grand Slam singles titles , making him among the most successful men 's tennis players ever .
Many Swiss also follow ice hockey and support one of the 12 teams of the National League , which is the most attended league in Europe .
It also became World Vice-Champion in 2013 and 2018 .
The numerous lakes make Switzerland an attractive place for sailing .
The largest , Lake Geneva , is the home of the sailing team Alinghi which was the first European team to win the America 's Cup in 2003 and which successfully defended the title in 2007 .
Swiss tennis player Roger Federer is widely regarded as one of the greatest tennis players of all time .
He has won 20 Grand Slam tournaments overall including a record 8 Wimbledon titles .
He has also won a record 6 ATP Finals .
He was ranked no .
1 in the ATP Rankings for a record 237 consecutive weeks .
He ended 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 and 2009 ranked no .
1 .
Fellow swiss tennis stars Martina Hingis and Stan Wawrinka also hold multiple Grand Slam titles .
Switzerland won the Davis Cup title in 2014 .
Motorsport racecourses and events were banned in Switzerland following the 1955 Le Mans disaster with exception to events such as Hillclimbing .
During this period , the country still produced successful racing drivers such as Clay Regazzoni , Sébastien Buemi , Jo Siffert , Dominique Aegerter , successful World Touring Car Championship driver Alain Menu , 2014 24 Hours of Le Mans winner Marcel Fässler and 2015 24 Hours Nürburgring winner Nico Müller .
Switzerland also won the A1GP World Cup of Motorsport in 2007–08 with driver Neel Jani .
Swiss motorcycle racer Thomas Lüthi won the 2005 MotoGP World Championship in the 125cc category .
In June 2007 the Swiss National Council , one house of the Federal Assembly of Switzerland , voted to overturn the ban , however the other house , the Swiss Council of States rejected the change and the ban remains in place .
Traditional sports include Swiss wrestling or Schwingen .
It is an old tradition from the rural central cantons and considered the national sport by some .
Hornussen is another indigenous Swiss sport , which is like a cross between baseball and golf .
Cuisine Main article : Swiss cuisine See also : Culinary Heritage of Switzerland Fondue is melted cheese , into which bread is dipped .
The cuisine of Switzerland is multifaceted .
While some dishes such as fondue , raclette or rösti are omnipresent through the country , each region developed its own gastronomy according to the differences of climate and languages .
Chocolate has been made in Switzerland since the 18th century .
Still , it gained its reputation at the end of the 19th century with the invention of modern techniques such as conching and tempering , which enabled its production on a high-quality level .
Also , a breakthrough was the invention of solid milk chocolate in 1875 by Daniel Peter .
The Swiss are the world 's largest consumers of chocolate .
Due to the popularisation of processed foods at the end of the 19th century , Swiss health food pioneer Maximilian Bircher-Benner created the first nutrition-based therapy in the form of the well-known rolled oats cereal dish , called Birchermüesli .
The most popular alcoholic drink in Switzerland is wine .
Switzerland is notable for the variety of grapes grown because of the large variations in terroirs , with their specific mixes of soil , air , altitude and light .
Swiss wine is produced mainly in Valais , Vaud ( Lavaux ) , Geneva and Ticino , with a small majority of white wines .
Vineyards have been cultivated in Switzerland since the Roman era , even though certain traces of a more ancient origin can be found .
The most widespread varieties are the Chasselas ( called Fendant in Valais ) and Pinot noir .
The Merlot is the main variety produced in Ticino
